P8105_HW2_KJF2152
================
Kaleb J. Frierson
2024-09-30

- [Calling Libraries](#calling-libraries)
- [Problem 1](#problem-1)
  - [Read & Clean](#read--clean)
  - [Tidy data?](#tidy-data)
  - [Investigate](#investigate)
- [Problem 2](#problem-2)
- [Problem 3](#problem-3)

# Calling Libraries

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(haven)
library(readxl)
```

# Problem 1

## Read & Clean

Read and clean the data; retain line, station, name, station latitude /
longitude, routes served, entry, vending, entrance type, and ADA
compliance. Convert the entry variable from character (YES vs NO) to a
logical variable (the ifelse or case_match function may be useful).

``` r
mta = 
  read_csv("Data/NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv", 
           show_col_types = FALSE) |> 
  janitor::clean_names()


 mta_clean = 
   mta |> 
  select(line, station_name, station_latitude, station_longitude, route1:route11 ,
         entry, vending, entrance_type, ada) |> 
    mutate(entry = ifelse(entry == "YES", TRUE, FALSE))
```

## Tidy data?

Write a short paragraph about this dataset – explain briefly what
variables the dataset contains, describe your data cleaning steps so
far, and give the dimension (rows x columns) of the resulting dataset.
Are these data tidy?

``` r
nrow(mta_clean)
```

    ## [1] 1868

``` r
ncol(mta_clean)
```

    ## [1] 19

``` r
head(mta_clean)
```

    ## # A tibble: 6 × 19
    ##   line     station_name station_latitude station_longitude route1 route2 route3
    ##   <chr>    <chr>                   <dbl>             <dbl> <chr>  <chr>  <chr> 
    ## 1 4 Avenue 25th St                  40.7             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ## 2 4 Avenue 25th St                  40.7             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ## 3 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 N      R      <NA>  
    ## 4 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 N      R      <NA>  
    ## 5 4 Avenue 36th St                  40.7             -74.0 N      R      <NA>  
    ## 6 4 Avenue 45th St                  40.6             -74.0 R      <NA>   <NA>  
    ## # ℹ 12 more variables: route4 <chr>, route5 <chr>, route6 <chr>, route7 <chr>,
    ## #   route8 <dbl>, route9 <dbl>, route10 <dbl>, route11 <dbl>, entry <lgl>,
    ## #   vending <chr>, entrance_type <chr>, ada <lgl>

``` r
summary(mta_clean)
```

    ##      line           station_name       station_latitude station_longitude
    ##  Length:1868        Length:1868        Min.   :40.58    Min.   :-74.03   
    ##  Class :character   Class :character   1st Qu.:40.69    1st Qu.:-73.99   
    ##  Mode  :character   Mode  :character   Median :40.73    Median :-73.96   
    ##                                        Mean   :40.73    Mean   :-73.94   
    ##                                        3rd Qu.:40.77    3rd Qu.:-73.91   
    ##                                        Max.   :40.90    Max.   :-73.76   
    ##                                                                          
    ##     route1             route2             route3             route4         
    ##  Length:1868        Length:1868        Length:1868        Length:1868       
    ##  Class :character   Class :character   Class :character   Class :character  
    ##  Mode  :character   Mode  :character   Mode  :character   Mode  :character  
    ##                                                                             
    ##                                                                             
    ##                                                                             
    ##                                                                             
    ##     route5             route6             route7              route8     
    ##  Length:1868        Length:1868        Length:1868        Min.   :1.000  
    ##  Class :character   Class :character   Class :character   1st Qu.:1.000  
    ##  Mode  :character   Mode  :character   Mode  :character   Median :4.000  
    ##                                                           Mean   :2.979  
    ##                                                           3rd Qu.:5.000  
    ##                                                           Max.   :5.000  
    ##                                                           NA's   :1820   
    ##      route9         route10        route11       entry        
    ##  Min.   :2.000   Min.   :3      Min.   :7      Mode :logical  
    ##  1st Qu.:2.000   1st Qu.:3      1st Qu.:7      FALSE:115      
    ##  Median :2.000   Median :3      Median :7      TRUE :1753     
    ##  Mean   :2.536   Mean   :3      Mean   :7                     
    ##  3rd Qu.:2.000   3rd Qu.:3      3rd Qu.:7                     
    ##  Max.   :5.000   Max.   :3      Max.   :7                     
    ##  NA's   :1840    NA's   :1845   NA's   :1845                  
    ##    vending          entrance_type         ada         
    ##  Length:1868        Length:1868        Mode :logical  
    ##  Class :character   Class :character   FALSE:1400     
    ##  Mode  :character   Mode  :character   TRUE :468      
    ##                                                       
    ##                                                       
    ##                                                       
    ## 

The initial dataset (which I nicknamed “mta” in my original dataframe)
had 1868 rows and 32 columns. I created a new dataframe called
“mta_clean” which used mta, kept the assigned variables, and turned the
“entry” variable into a logical variable. In this new dataset there are
1868 rows and 19 columns. I believe these data are tidy. WHY?

## Investigate

How many distinct stations are there? Note that stations are identified
both by name and by line (e.g. 125th St 8th Avenue; 125st Broadway;
125st Lenox); the distinct function may be useful here.

How many stations are ADA compliant?

What proportion of station entrances / exits without vending allow
entrance?

Reformat data so that route number and route name are distinct
variables. How many distinct stations serve the A train?

Of the stations that serve the A train, how many are ADA compliant?

# Problem 2

This problem uses the Mr. Trash Wheel dataset, available as an Excel
file on the course website.

Read and clean the Mr. Trash Wheel sheet:

specify the sheet in the Excel file and to omit non-data entries (rows
with notes / figures; columns containing notes) using arguments in
read_excel use reasonable variable names omit rows that do not include
dumpster-specific data round the number of sports balls to the nearest
integer and converts the result to an integer variable (using
as.integer) Use a similar process to import, clean, and organize the
data for Professor Trash Wheel and Gwynnda, and combine this with the
Mr. Trash Wheel dataset to produce a single tidy dataset. To keep track
of which Trash Wheel is which, you may need to add an additional
variable to both datasets before combining.

Write a paragraph about these data; you are encouraged to use inline R.
Be sure to note the number of observations in the resulting dataset, and
give examples of key variables. For available data, what was the total
weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel? What was the total
number of cigarette butts collected by Gwynnda in June of 2022?

# Problem 3

This problem uses data on elements of the Great British Bake Off. The
show has been running for 10 seasons; in each episode, contestants
compete in signature challenges, technical challenges, and a
showstopper. At the end of an episode the winner is crowned “Star Baker”
(and winner in the last episode of a season), and a loser is eliminated.

Information about individual bakers, their bakes, and their performance
is included in bakers.csv, bakes.csv, and results.csv. In the first part
of this problem, your goal is to create a single, well-organized dataset
with all the information contained in these data files. To that end:
import, clean, tidy, and otherwise wrangle each of these datasets; check
for completeness and correctness across datasets (e.g. by viewing
individual datasets and using anti_join); merge to create a single,
final dataset; and organize this so that variables and observations are
in meaningful orders. Export the result as a CSV in the directory
containing the original datasets.

Describe your data cleaning process, including any questions you have or
choices you made. Briefly discuss the final dataset.

Create a reader-friendly table showing the star baker or winner of each
episode in Seasons 5 through 10. Comment on this table – were there any
predictable overall winners? Any surprises?

Import, clean, tidy, and organize the viewership data in viewers.csv.
Show the first 10 rows of this dataset. What was the average viewership
in Season 1? In Season 5?
